Science of Logic 
Preliminary conception 
§ 19 
Logic is the science of the pure idea, i.e. the idea in the abstract element of 
thinking. 
The same proviso that holds generally for the concepts prefacing the 
philosophy - namely, that they are determinations drawn from and 
subsequent to the survey of the whole - also holds for this as well as 
other determinations contained in this preliminary conception. 
It can indeed be said that logic is the science of thinking, of its 
determinations and laws. However, thinking as such constitutes only 
the universal determinateness or the element in which the idea exists 
qua logical. The idea is thinking not insoru as the latter is formal, 
but insof..u as it is the self-developing totality of its distinctive 
determinations and laws, which it gives itself and does not already 
have and find within itself 
Logic is the most difficult science in that it has to do not with 
intultlons and not even with abstract sensory representations 
as in geometry - but with pure abstractions. It requires a certain 
strength and versatility to retreat into pure thought, to hold on to it 
steadfastly and to move about in it. On the other hand, logic could 
be considered the easiest science, because its content is nothing but 
one's own thinking and its familiar determinations, and these 
are at once the simplest and the elementary sort of determinations. 
They are also what is most familiar, namely being, nothing, etc., 
determinateness, magnitude, etc., being-in-itself, being-for-itself, 
one, many, etc. This familiarity with them, however, makes the 
study of logic even harder. On the one hand, it is readily held to be 
not worth the effort to occupy oneself with such familiar things and, 
on the other, the point is to become familiar with them in a way that 
47 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
is entirely different from, indeed even opposed to, the way one is 
already. 
The usefolness of logic concerns the relationship to the subject, 
namely, the extent to which the subject [thereby] provides himself 
with a certain education for other purposes. His education through 
studyi.ng logic consists in acquiring practice in thinking, since this 
science is a thinking of thinking, and in getting thoughts into his 
head [precisely] as thoughts. 
However, insofar as the logical 
dimension [tkts Logische] constitutes the absolute form of the truth 
and even more than that, the pure truth itself, it is something 
completely different from anything merely useful. But just as the 
most excellent, the freest and the most self-reliant things are also the 
most useful, so logic, too, may be understood in this way. Seen in 
this light, its usefulness must be deemed different from the merely 
formal exercise of thinking. 
Addition I. The first question is, what is the object of our science? The simplest 
and most intelligible answer to this question is that the truth is its object. Truth 
is a grand word and an even grander thing. If someone's spirit and mind are- still 
healthy, his heart must leap at once at the thought of this word. But then the 
'but' immediately surfaces, namely whether we are capable of knowing the truth. 
An incommensurability seems to obtain between us as imperfect humans and the 
truth as it exists in and for itself, and the question arises as to the bridge between 
the finite and the infinite. God is the truth; how are we to know him? Thevirtues 
of humility and modesty seem to conflict with such an undertaking. - However, 
one also asks whether the truth can be known, merely to find a justification for 
trudging on in the banality of one's finite ends. Such humility is not worth much. 
Such language as 'How am I, a poor earthly worm, to know the truth?' is a thing 
of the past. Its place has been taken by arrogance and smugness, and some have 
fancied themselves to be immediately in possession of the truth. 
Our youth 
has been persuaded that they possess the truth (in religious and ethical matters) 
without further ado. In particular, it has been said in this context that all adults 
are wooden and fossilized and immersed in untruth. The dawn has appeared to 
the young people, so they say, but the older world is stuck in the muddle and 
morass of the everyday. In this context, the special sciences have been designated 
something that must indeed be acquired,. bur only as a means for the external 
purposes of life. Here, then, it is not modesry that holds off from knowledge and 
from the study of the truth, but instead the conviction that one already possesses 
the truth in and for itself. The older generation does indeed pin its hopes on the 
young, for it is they who are supposed to keep the world and science advancing. 
But this hope is conferred upon the young only insofar as they do not remain as 
they are, but take on the bitter labour of the spirit. 
There is yet another brand of modesty about the truth. This is the seeming 
nobleness [VornehmheitJ towards the truth that we see in Pilate facing Jesus. Pilate 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
49 
asked 'What is the truth?' in the sense of someone finished with everything, for 
whom nothing is of significance anymore - the sense in which Solomon says 'All 
is vanity'. - Here, there is nothing left but s~bjective vanity: 
. 
Timidity is a further impediment to knOWing the truth. It IS easy for the lethargIC 
mind to say that one did not really mean to be serious about philosophizing. One 
also hears logic lectures, it is true, but this is supposed to leave us as we .are. ~t 
is believed that if thinking goes beyond the ordmary reach of representa~lOns It 
moves into sinister territory, that one entrusts oneself there to a sea on whICh one 
is tossed hither and thither by the waves of thought only to land eventually back 
again on the sandbank of this temporal finitude that one had left for .nothing at ~L 
The results of such views can be seen in the world. People may acqUire many skills 
and grow to be knowledgeable in many ways; one may become an accomplished 
civil servant and be educated in preparation of whatever one's particular purposes 
may be. But it is something quite different to educat.e one's mind for what is lo~ier 
and to care about that. We may hope that in our times a demand for somethmg 
better has dawned on our youth and that they will not be content with the straw 
of superficial knowledge. 
. 
.. 
Addition 2. Everyone is in agreement that thinking is the object of logiC. StilI, 
one can have a very low and a very high opinion of thinking. Thus, o~ the one 
hand, it is said: this is just a thought, meaning by that that the thought IS merely 
subjective, arbitrary and contingent, not the basic matter itself, not what is true 
and actual. On the other hand, one may also have a very high opinion of thoughts 
and understand them in such a way that they alone are able to reach the highest 
truth, the nature of God, and that nothing can be known about God through 
! 
I 
l 
I 
I 
the senses. It is said that God is spirit and wishes to be worshipped in spirit and 
in truth. But then we admit that what is felt and what is perceived by the senses 
is not what is spiritual, and that thinking is instead the innermost part of spirit 
and that only spirit is able to recognize spirit. Spirit may inde~d also assu:ne the 
form of feeling, as in religion, for instance. Bur, in general, feehng as. such, I.e. t~e 
form of feeling, is one thing, while its content is quite another. Feeh~g as such IS 
generally the form of the sensory dimension [des Sinnlichenl, somethmg we share 
with the rest of the animals. This form may indeed appropriate a concrete content, 
and yet this content does not properly belong to thi.s f~rm. The for~ o~ fee~ing ~s 
the lowest form for a spiritual content. Only in thInking and as thInking IS thIS 
content, God himself, in its truth. In this sense, then, thought is not just mere 
thought, but rather the highest and, properly viewed, the only manner in which 
it is possible to comprehend what is eternal and in and for itself [tkts an und fur 
sich Seiende]. 
Just as one can have a high and a low opinion of thinking, so also with t?e 
science of thought. Anybody can think, it is believed, without the study of.loglc, 
much as one can digest food without having studied physiology. And even ~f one 
has studied logic, one thinks just as one did before, per~aps more methodl?ally, 
but otherwise with little difference, or so it seems. If logIC had no other busmess 
than to familiarize us with the activity of merely formal thinking, then it would 
indeed produce nothing one would not have other:wise ?~en doi~g just as well 
all along. The earlier logic was in fact reduced to thiS posmon. InCIdentally, even 
50 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
acquaintance with thinking as a merely subjective activity is honourable and of 
interest to human beings. By knowing [wissenJ who they are and what they are 
doing, human beings distinguish themselves from animals. - On the other hand, 
however, as the science of thinking, logic occupies an eminent position, insofar 
as thought alone is capable of experiencing what is highest, namely the true. So 
when the science oflogic contemplates thinking in its activity and production (for 
thinking is not an activity devoid of content, since it produces thoughts and the 
thought), its content is a fortiori the supersensory world, and to occupy oneself 
with it is to linger in this world. Mathematics deals with the abstractions of number 
and space, which are, however, still something sensory, albeit something sensory 
in an abstract sense without existence. Thoughttakes leave of even this ultimate 
sensory element and is freely in communion with itself, renouncing internal and 
external sensoriness, and removing all particular interests and inclinations. Insofar 
as logic stands on such a ground, we should think of it in a more dignified way 
than is usually the case. 
Addition 3. The need to understand logic in a deeper sense than that of the 
science of merely formal thinking is prompted by the interest we take in religion, 
the state, the law and ethical life. In earlier times, people had no misgivings about 
thinking; they engaged in it spontaneously and with a fresh mind. They thought 
about God, nature, and the state and were convinced that it is only by means 
of thought that one is able to know the truth, not by means of the senses or 
coincidental representations and opinions. But while engaging in thinking in this 
way it turned out that the highest relationships in life are thereby compromised. 
Through thinking, the positive state of affairs was deprived of its power. State 
constitutions became casualties of thought; religion was attacked by thought; 
firm religious representations, once held to be valid unconditionally on the basis 
of revelation, were undermined and the old faith was toppled in the minds of 
many. Thus, for example, the Greek philosophers opposed the old religion and 
destroyed the representations of it. This is why philosophers were exiled and killed 
on the grounds that they overthrew religion and the state, which were essentially 
connected to one another. In this way, thinking made its mark on actuality and had 
the most awe-inspiring effect. People thus became aware of the power of thinking 
and started to examine more closely its pretensions. They professed to finding 
out that it claimed too much and could not achieve what it undertook. Instead 
of coming to understand the essence of God, nature and spirit and in general 
the truth, thinking had overthrown the state and religion. Hence, the demand 
was made that thinking justify its results, and it is the examination of the nature 
of thinking, and what it is entitled to, that has in large measure constituted the 
interest of philosophy in more recent times. 
§ 20 
Taking up thinking as it presents itself most readily, it appears (0:) at first 
in its usual subjective meaning as one of the spirit's activities or faculties 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
f 
51 
alongside others such as the sensory dimension, intultlng, fantasy etc., 
desiring, willing and so on. Its product, namely the determinacy or form 
of thought, is the universal, the abstract in general. Thinking as an activity 
is thus the active universal and, more precisely, the univers~ that acts 
upon itself in so far as its accomplishment, i.e. what it produces, is the 
universal. Represented as a subject, thinking is a thinking being, and the 
simple expression for a concretely existing [existierenden] subject that thinks 
is J. 
The determinations offered here and in the following sections are 
not to be taken as assertions and as my opinions about thinking. 
Since, however, in this preliminary exposition no derivation or 
proof can be given, they may be regarded as focts such that in the 
consciousness of anyone who has and contemplates thoughts it is 
found empirically to be the case that the character of universality 
and likewise the subsequent determinations are on hand in them. 
To be sure, for the observation of the facts of one's consciousness 
and representations, it is prerequisite that one be already educated 
in the tasks of paying attention and engaging in abstraction. 
Already in such a preliminary exposition as this, the differences 
among sensory dimension, representation, and thoughts come up. 
They are crucial for grasping the nature and the types of knowing. It 
will therefore serve our elucidation well to call attention to these 
differences already at this point. The sensory is initially explained 
by reference to its external origin, i.e. the senses or instruments of 
sensation. However, mention of the instrument does not by itself 
afford a determination of what is meant by it. The difference 
between the sensory and thought is to be located in the fact that 
the determination of the former is its individualness, and insofar 
as the individual (taken quite abstractly as an atom) also stands 
in connection with other things, whatever is sensory is outside
of something-else, the abstract forms of which are, more precisely, 
those of being side-by-side and after one another. - Representation 
has such sensory material [Stoff] for its content, but posited in the 
determination of being mine, i.e. the determination that such 
content is in me, and of universality, the relation-to-self, simplicity. 
Yet representation also contains, in addition to that sensory material, 
material that has "originated from self-conscious thought, such as the 
representations of what is right, ethical, religious, or even of thought 
itself, and it is not easily noticed how the difference between such 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
representations and the thoughts of such content is to be marked. 
Here it is the case that the content is a thought and the form of 
universality is present as well, which is inherent in a content's being 
in me and in being a representation at all. But even in this respect, 
the distinctiveness of the representation is generally to be located in 
the fact that in it such content at the same time remains isolated. 
To be sure, the right, the just, and similar determinations do not 
occupy the sensory [positions of] being-outside-of-one-another 
proper to space. They may indeed appear to be somehow successive 
in time, but their content as such is not represented as being 
encumbered by time, as transient and alterable in it. Still, even 
such intrinsically spiritual [an sich geiftige] determinations stand 
isolated on the wide terrain of the inner, abstract universality of 
representing as such. In this isolation, they are simple; right, duty, 
God. Now either representation remains at a standstill with the 
determination that 'right is right' and 'God is God' or, if it is more 
educated, it adds determinations, for instance, that God is the 
creator of the world, all wise, omnipotent, etc. In this case, several 
isolated simple determinations are similarly strung together, 
remaining outside one another, despite the bond assigned to them 
in the subject possessing them. Representation here meets with the 
understanding which differs from the former only in that it posits 
relationships of the universal and the particular or of cause and 
effect, etc. It thus establishes relations of necessity among the 
isolated determinations of representation, while representation 
leaves them standing side-by-side in its indeterminate space, 
connected only by the bare also. The distinction between 
representation and thoughts has a special significance, because it 
can generally be said that philosophy does nothing but transform
representations into thoughts - and, indeed, beyond that, the mere 
thought into the concept. 
Incidentally, when it was said that the determinations of the 
sensory are those of individuality and being-outside-ofone-another, 
it can also be added that the latter, too, are in turn thoughts and 
universals themselves. In the logic, it will be shown that thought and 
the universal are just this, namely to be itself as well as its other, that 
its reach extends over the other, and that nothing escapes from it. 
Given that language is the product of thought, nothing that is not 
universal can be expressed in it either. What I only mean, is mine, ' 
belonging to me as this particular individual. If, however, language 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
53 
expresses only what is universal, then I cannot say what I mean only. 
And the ineffable, feeling, sentiment are not what is most exquisite 
and true, but instead the most insignificant and untrue. When I say 
'the individual', 'this individual', 'here', 'now', then these are all 
universalities. Anything and everything is an individual, a this, even 
when it is sensory, just as much as a here, now. Similarly, when I say 
'I' I mean to refer to myself as this one individual, excluding everyone 
else. But what I say (namely, '1') is precisely each and every one, the 
I excluding everyone else. Kant used the awkward expression that 
the I accompanies all my representations as well as sentiments, 
desires, actions, etc. This I is the universal in and for itself, and the 
commonality is also a universal, albeit only an outer form of 
universality. All other humans have it in common with me to be an 
I, just as it is a common feature of all my sensations, representations, 
etc. to be mine. 1: however, taken abstractly and as such, is the pure 
relationship to itself in which abstraction is made from representing, 
sensing, indeed from every state as from every particularity of 
nature, talent, experience, etc. I is in this respect the concrete 
existence [Existenz] of the entirely abstract universality, the abstractly 
fiee. This is why the I is thinking as a subject, and because I am at the 
same time present in all my sensations, representations, and states, 
etc., thought is present everywhere and permeat